Cardiff Carnival 25th Anniversary Project interviewer Steve Fletcher.
The location of the interview is the Swicker office.
Today's date is Monday the 21st of September 2015 and we're talking to Mark Rosamond.
Mark would you be kind enough to spell your name for the record?
Mark with a K Rosamond R O S O M A N.
Thanks very much. Mark of course I know you as one of the leaders of the fabulous group Omadom.
Could you tell us about Omadom and particularly its origins? Where did it all begin?
Omadom actually began with my wife and I, Amanda.
We were previously members of another dance troupe, the Desert Divas, which have sadly after 10 years have now ended.
But before they ended we decided that we wanted to run our own troupe.
So we decided because my wife had been dancing for several years and I was interested in drumming,
in particular drumming on a North African drum named a darbuka, which is a traditional belly dance drum.
It's the equivalent of a lead guitar in a modern day band.
So we got together, first of all we're just doing it at home, playing about together.
Then we got the interest of other people that had seen and heard of what we were doing.
So we decided to start the troupe called Omadom.
Omadom, there's quite a little story to the name Omadom.
Oh I should add that we are a drumming tribal style belly dance.
Tribal style is an American form of belly dance.
It's quite modern although it's using traditional belly dance moves.
What I do myself on the darbuka is play traditional Egyptian or Arabic style rhythms that belly dancers will well know.
Sorry Steve, I've lost my plot. What was the next bit?
Well besides the music which is fabulous and powers it all along, there's a fabulous visual image to your group as well.
How would you describe it?
Right, I would call it a colour explosion.
My wife does all the design and the girls that are in Omadom help her to make the costumes ourselves.
As you know when we've taken part in various carnivals and festivals for Swicker,
we try and get right into the spirit of carnival by adopting designs and things that are useful to Swicker such as our St. David's Day parade,
for example where we introduce the Welsh flag as part of our costume.
But basically we go for, the girls aren't the type of belly dancers that most people think of where they're scantily clad.
So the dresses for example or the skirts are usually made of 25 yards of material so they're quite heavy.
They wear little trolley tops and usually the only part that's exposed of their bodies are their forearms and perhaps the midriff.
So it's quite a covered up style but it's very exciting nonetheless and the colour and the sounds that we produce I think add to the enhancement of Omadom.
I have to say musically and visually a feast for the eye, a feast for the ear.
Carly Carnival, you've been involved in the last two I think, is that right?
Possibly two or three, yeah.
Two or three, yeah.
Good thing this isn't too scientific.
What are your impressions of, because of course in the format of Carly Carnival that we're discussing we have a stage in the haze or elsewhere in town.
So Omadom are one of those groups who in a sense blessed the carnival twice over because you give a static set but also then you join us on parade.
What are your impressions of the audience? How is this received?
Right, I'm glad you asked that question because it has prompted my memory.
It is actually three carnivals that we've taken part in because the first one we just took part in the parade.
Since that time we've actually performed twice on the haze as part of the show for the general public.
What was particularly brilliant about 2015's carnival, if I can pick on that one in particular, is that we actually introduced a singer to what we traditionally do.
So it wasn't, the vocals were purely sounds that the singer had used to accompany our drumming rhythms.
So there was no actual language used, it was just purely vocal sounds but we felt that it worked very well.
I have to say it did.
Thank you very much.
And we also really appreciate, and I don't know whether you can remember now, but for the last two years we've actually had members of the public unable to contain themselves any longer and they've actually got up and started dancing with the girls.
Now a lot of troops were maybe put off by that but we actually embraced that and we do like it a lot when the public get up and have a go with us.
I think one of the joys of one with Dom is, well what can I say, your openness of spirit, your celebratory approach to it all.
And of course the relationship with Swicker is ongoing, and burgeoning.
Most recently for the third year, Swicker Carnival has undertaken the Carnival number six at Port Myrion, which is part of Festival number six.
And this year I was delighted that you guys were able to join us.
What are your impressions, well I suppose first of all of your actual performance, and then perhaps for posterity, the wider festival.
What did you make of it all, Festival number six?
Festival number six, well what can I say, a bit of a journey as you know, a couple of hours drive, but we managed to split the troop into four vehicles to ferry our way up to the festival.
I thought it was brilliant that there was shuttle coaches laid on to transfer us from the car parking area to the actual site.
A bit of an eye opener, carrying all our camping gear up the hill, but nonetheless it didn't put us off in any way shape or form.
The view was magnificent.
What's we got there, artist camping was on the top of the hill.
It was brilliant views.
A beautiful day in fact.
The weather was, apart from the first night when it did rain, I was alright because I'm used to camping.
A couple of the dancers did get a bit wet, but they managed to dry their costumes in time for the actual parade on the Saturday.
We thought it was fantastic.
We would have loved to have done more, but obviously we was there to do a certain role, which we fulfilled, and it was absolutely brilliant to meet up on the Portmurrayan Plaza, I believe it's called.
Again, we thought we were colourful, but when we were with everybody else there was just colour absolutely everywhere, and the photos will testify to that.
Unfortunately you can't see them on this.
I'm sure we'll put them online.
I particularly enjoyed the other groups that were performing on the plaza, such as Wonder Brass and the Swicker Crew.
And of course the other guys that stick out in my mind at this moment was Spark.
I thought they were fabulous.
In fact, they've inspired me to get my own drummers in the troupe to actually dance now.
So we are actually working on a bit of movement because of what we saw on that day.
Cardiff Carnival has always been, what can I say, multicultural, intercultural.
And what I think was wonderful was the way in which Omidum have brought us a taste of East European and Egyptian and Arabic influences.
What's it like actually being on a Cardiff Carnival parade on a sunny day?
Very hot if it's a very sunny day.
But no, the atmosphere is brilliant.
The streets are lined with people that have come specifically to observe the scene, if I can put it that way.
We make a point of talking to other participants in the parade, so it's always nice to see people.
We've only done three, but already we're starting to have a rapport with people that we've seen before.
It's just fabulous.
I can't really explain.
We did have the one year, Steve, if you remember when the heavens opened.
It rained in Wales, Mark.
Surely not.
We all got absolutely soaked.
What I was very pleased with our dancers in particular was that they used make-up that seemed to last the storm.
And because of the way they wear their costumes, you couldn't even tell they were wet, whereas everybody else looked drenched.
The girls still looked, and they maintained their smiles, which was fabulous to see.
Very much part of the carnival business.
In terms of smiling, I must confess I am, on behalf of Cardiff Carnival, to you in particular, Mark, and to the whole Hormodorm troupe.
Bless you. Thank you very much.
And to you in particular, keep on drumming, mate.
Thank you very much, Steve.